Tiber upgrade (#259)
autonity/docs.autonity.org: concepts/ofd/index.md

---
title: "Omission fault detection (OFD)"
description: >
  Autonity's Omission Fault Detection model -- reporting mechanism, temporal constraints, and economics for reporting offences and penalties for failure to participate in consensus.
---

## Overview

This section describes the Autonity omission fault detection protocol. It covers the role of the block proposer in creating proof of which committee members have participated in consensus voting of that block, the role of validators in validating that _activity proof_, and the incentives and disincentives applied to validators for proven inactivity during consensus.

> Autonity implements an _omission fault detection_ (OFD) protocol for detecting if [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee) members are _actively_ participating in [consensus](/glossary/#consensus) voting rounds. To ensure the maximum level of network liveness committee members should be online and participating in each [consensus](/glossary/#consensus) voting round. An _inactive committee member_ is a committee member that is failing to do this. It is _inactive_, it is not participating in consensus in a timely fashion. To be _inactive_ the validator is either not sending consensus messages when it should (failure to vote) or it is sending consensus messages too late to be included in a consensus round (failure to vote on time). Both scenarios result in the validator missing voting. In either scenario the validator is considered to have lost liveness and is considered _inactive_ by protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Autonity implements an _omission fault detection_ (OFD) protocol for detecting if [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee) members are _actively_ participating in [consensus](/glossary/#consensus) voting rounds. To ensure the maximum level of network liveness committee members should be online and participating in each [consensus](/glossary/#consensus) voting round. An _inactive committee member_ is a committee member that is failing to do this. To be _inactive_ the validator is either not sending consensus messages when it should (failure to vote) or it is sending consensus messages too late to be included in a consensus round (failure to vote on time). In either scenario the validator is considered to have lost liveness and is deemed _inactive_ by protocol.
```

> Autonity's [Tendermint BFT consensus](/concepts/consensus/pos/) is coordinated by committee member voting via the broadcasting of consensus messages in a consensus channel in the [communication layer](/concepts/architecture/#communication-layer). It assumes a stable broadcast communication channel and a [semi-synchronous network timing model (_GST & Delta_) for message reception](/concepts/system-model/#networking). The Tendermint algorithm assumes that at _GST + Delta_, all the consensus messages sent at _GST_ should have been received by committee members. Consensus messages arriving after the _GST + Delta_ time point are arriving too late for inclusion in consensus round voting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Autonity's [Tendermint BFT consensus](/concepts/consensus/pos/) is coordinated by committee member voting via the broadcasting of consensus messages in the [communication layer](/concepts/architecture/#communication-layer). It assumes a stable broadcast communication channel and a [semi-synchronous network timing model (_GST & Delta_) for message reception](/concepts/system-model/#networking). The Tendermint algorithm assumes that at _GST + Delta_, all the consensus messages sent at _GST_ should have been received by committee members.
```

Reviewer: I feel like it is better to remove the last sentence as it can cause confusing with the omission delta... I think the previous explaination is enough.

> The OFD protocol is based upon the processing of consensus messages and their timing allowing for the delta latency, therefore. [Consensus committee](/concepts/consensus/committee/) members participate in [consensus rounds](/concepts/consensus/pos/#consensus-round-and-internal-state) with block _proposal_, _prevote_, and _precommit_ stages before a block is committed to [system state](/concepts/system-model/#system-state). (See the concept description [Consensus round and internal state](/concepts/consensus/pos/#consensus-round-and-internal-state)). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OFD protocol is based upon the processing of consensus messages and their timing, allowing for $\Delta$  blocks of latency. [Consensus committee](/concepts/consensus/committee/) members participate in [consensus rounds](/concepts/consensus/pos/#consensus-round-and-internal-state) with block _proposal_, _prevote_, and _precommit_ stages before a block is committed to [system state](/concepts/system-model/#system-state). (See the concept description [Consensus round and internal state](/concepts/consensus/pos/#consensus-round-and-internal-state)). 
```

A committee member is considered online by another node if the latter receives the consensus messages it expects in a timely manner. This information is then used to generate the activity report of the consensus participants.

Note that every committee member node generates an activity report based on its _local view_ of network activity. Local views may differ across committee members depending on the network and individual committee member liveness. For example, node `X` sent a message which never arrived at node `Y` due to networking issues.

Inactivity is _detected_ by the use of BLS signatures to prove activity. Validators sign consensus messages using their [consensus key](/concepts/validator/#p2p-node-keys-autonitykeys). During block proposal, the block proposer for height $h$ will aggregate the _precommit_ signatures of height $h - \Delta$ into an $ActivityProof$, which is included in the header of $h$. $\Delta$ is defined as a number of blocks, so each block header contains a historical record of committee activity at block height $h - \Delta$.

> $\Delta$ is the number of blocks committee members wait for before generating an activity proof. I.e. activity proof for block $x$ is going to be computed at block $x+\Delta$. The $\Delta$ allows for two temporal factors, epoch periods and the network semi-synchronous nature. Firstly, it allows for a fair start of an epoch and prevents the _block proposer_ looking for inactivity in the previous epoch where it would be unaware of the committee as committee changes end of epoch. Secondly, it allows for the p2p networks _GST + Delta_ latency assumption for timely consensus gossiping.

Reviewer: I understand the message here, however I feel like the part about the fair start of the epoch needs a bit of refactoring.

The fair start of the epoch is not really granted by the usage of delta, but rather by the protocol allowing (and enforcing) empty activity proof for the first delta block of the epoch.

Author: Following discussion with @lorenzo-dev1 , edited in commits 8e52388fb1866300309c6619bc53c379f442c16c and ec44b38195b129d446878533afc079a3f05d32c9

::: {.callout-note title="What is BLS signature aggregation?" collapse="false"}
A BLS Signature is a digital signature using the BLS12-381 elliptic curve. An aggregation of signatures created with this curve can be efficiently verified.

> Autonity uses BLS signature aggregation verification to cryptographically verify which consensus committee members  posted a _precommit_ vote and so _actively_ participated in consensus. A large committee size is an Autonity design goal for scalability. The BLS curve property of verification efficiency makes it suited use as a signature aggregation algorithm in consensus computation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Autonity uses BLS signature aggregation verification to cryptographically verify which consensus committee members  posted a _precommit_ vote and so are _actively_ participated in consensus. A large committee size is an Autonity design goal for scalability. The BLS curve property of verification efficiency makes it suited use as a signature aggregation algorithm in consensus computation.
```

Autonity Go Client uses the BLS12-381 [`blst`](https://github.com/supranational/blst) C library (<https://www.supranational.net/press/introducing-blst>).

For a deep-dive into BLS signature aggregation some great resources are the eth2 book section [BLS Signatures](https://eth2book.info/capella/part2/building_blocks/signatures/) or the IETF research group Internet-Draft [BLS Signatures](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-irtf-cfrg-bls-signature-05.html).
:::

It is important to note that OFD runs alongside Autonity's Tendermint proof of stake consensus implementation and is _fully automated_: omission accountability events are generated and processed by protocol; no manual intervention by validator operators is required. 

> As noted above the block proposer generates and includes a BLS signature aggregation of _precommit_ signatures of height $h - \Delta$ into the $ActivityProof$ included in the header of $h$. Each block header contains a historical record of committee activity in the current epoch, allowing for the $\Delta$ discussed above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As noted above the block proposer generates and includes a BLS signature aggregation of _precommit_ signatures of height $h - \Delta$ into the $ActivityProof$ included in the header of $h$.

> OFD inspects the $ActivityProof$ to determine committee _inactivity_ historically over a block window defined by the OFD protocol configuration parameter $LookbackWindow$. The $ActivityProof$, like an AFD fault proof, is on-chain, therefore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OFD inspects the $ActivityProof$ to determine committee _inactivity_ historically over a block window defined by the OFD protocol configuration parameter $LookbackWindow$. The $ActivityProof$, like an AFD fault proof, is therefore stored on-chain
```

Unlike [AFD](/concepts/accountability/) though, accountability events are not detected by committee member nodes and submitted to the AFD's Accountability Contract on chain as _accountability events_. For OFD the _activity proof_ is generated by the block proposer and included in the block header to submit on-chain. 

> The Omission Accountability Contract is invoked on each block finalisation to determine inactivity and compute inactivity penalties. Any penalties computed are then tracked in memory for application at epoch end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Omission Accountability Contract is invoked on each block finalisation to determine inactivity and compute inactivity scores. Inactivity penalties are computed and applied at epoch end.
```

> OFD functions, therefore, by submitting, verifying, and processing activity proofs for omission faults captured over a rolling block window by epoch.

Reviewer: I think something is missing here

Author: 'a validator'.  Corrected in commit d3418f44ded34a933f3a7dff40f12b8e087ee6cc.

Omission slashing penalties are computed by protocol and applied to the validator proportionally to the validator's liveness history measured by an _inactivity score_ during the epoch. Penalties are threefold:

> - withholding of OFD proposer fee reward incentives proportionally to the offline % of in the epoch, measured by the % of blocks the validator was offline for in the epoch

Reviewer: there is no withholding on the proposer rewards, the withholding gets applied to:
- the NTN inflation rewards (as correctly mentioned in the following line)
- the ATN epoch fees rewards

Author: Gotcha - there has been a conflation of proposer and ATN staking rewards withholding when it is only ATN staking rewards. Corrected in commit d3418f44ded34a933f3a7dff40f12b8e087ee6cc.

> - withholding of proposer [Newton inflation](/concepts/protocol-assets/newton/#total-supply-and-newton-inflation) rewards proportionally to the offline % of in the epoch, measured by the % of blocks the validator was offline for in the epoch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- withholding of [Newton inflation](/concepts/protocol-assets/newton/#total-supply-and-newton-inflation) rewards proportionally to the offline % of in the epoch, measured by the % of blocks the validator was offline for in the epoch
```

> - jailing if the validator's offline % in the epoch is greater than a permitted threshold set by protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- jailing and probation if the validator's offline % in the epoch is greater than a permitted threshold set by protocol
```

> - stake slashing if the validator is seen as inactive when under probation after repeated jailings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- stake slashing if the validator is seen as inactive when under probation after being jailed.
```

Penalties are applied as part of the state finalization function. As the last block of an epoch is finalized, the Autonity contract will: apply omission accountability for _inactivity_ to _offending validators_: witholding rewards, applying jailing, and slashing according to Autonity’s [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/accountability/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.

> Rewards are paid to block proposers for including as many signatures in the $ActivityProof$ as possible. The _block proposer_ reward is a fraction of transaction fees earned by protocol in the epoch. The block proposer's reward amount is computed based on the number of _activity proofs_ with signatures for more than $\frac{2}{3}$ quorum voting power generated by the proposer in the epoch. Rewards are paid to the  _reporting validator_ `treasury` account for distribution along with the staking rewards at epoch end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rewards are paid to block proposers for including as many signatures in the $ActivityProof$ as possible. The _block proposer_ reward is a fraction of the epoch rewards. The block proposer's reward amount is computed based on the proposer effort that he provided in the epoch. The proposer effort of an $ActivityProof$ is determined as the voting power of the signatures exceeding the quorum value. ATN rewards are paid to the  _reporting validator_ `treasury` account, while NTN rewards are autobonded.
```

I rephrased this sentence in a more precise way, however I am not convinced of my version as well. Feel free to modify if you come up with something better.

Author: I think that's pretty good @lorenzo-dev1 . I added a missing fullstop; committing suggestion. 👍

### Omission accountability prerequisites 

To participate in OFD a [validator](/glossary/#validator) must be a [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee) member.

## Omission Fault Detection protocol

OFD roles, core concepts, and the lifecycle of omission accountability processing from detection to applying penalties at epoch end.

### Roles

As a consensus committee member the validator may play the roles in the table beneath during OFD processing.

| Role | Description |
|:--|:--|
| _committee member_ | as a validator in the consensus committee executing Autonity's consensus protocol. For OFD generating and validating _activity proofs_, maintaining system state for inactivity scores, and computing and applying slashing penalties |
| _block proposer_ | as the validator proposing blocks, generating an _activity proof_ and including that in the block header for validation and submission on-chain |

> | _offending_ | as the validator found to be inactive by the OFD and the object of slashing penalties |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| _offender_ | as the validator found to be inactive by the OFD and the object of slashing penalties |
```

The economic impact of the OFD protocol on a validator depends on their role.

| Role | Economic impact |
|:--|:--|
| _offender_ | loss of stake, validator reputation, OFD proposer fee reward revenue, Newton inflation rewards for self-bonded stake, and jailing as the _offending validator_ found inactive during an epoch |
| _block proposer_ | gain of OFD proposer fee rewards for generating _activity proofs_ with precommit signatures $> \frac{2}{3}$ quorum voting power |

> The Autonity community is also a _beneficiary_ of OFD processing. Slashed stake token, withheld proposer fee rewards, and withheld Newton inflation rewards will be used for community funds.

Reviewer: ALso here, proposer rewards are never withheld

Author: Per https://github.com/autonity/docs.autonity.org/pull/259#discussion_r2063912019, corrected in commit d3418f44ded34a933f3a7dff40f12b8e087ee6cc.

### Protocol primitives

Essential primitives of OFD are: activity proof; delta; lookback window; inactivity score and thresholds; jailing.

#### Activity proof

> An _activity proof_ is a BLS signature aggregation of committee member _precommit_ votes submitted for a block during a Tendermint consensus voting round. The _block proposer_ includes an _activity proof_ in the block header and it is validated by the other committee members as part of block validation by all committee members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An _activity proof_ is a BLS signature aggregation of committee member _precommit_ votes submitted for a block during a Tendermint consensus voting round. The _block proposer_ includes an _activity proof_ in the block header and it is validated by the other committee members as part of block validation.
```

> Each block header contains a historical record of committee activity at block height $h$ is computed at $h + \Delta$ and used for activity signalling.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each block header $h$ contains a historical record of committee activity at block height $h - \Delta$. This information is used for activity signalling.  
```

#### Delta $\Delta$

The _delta_ $\Delta$ is a set number of blocks at the start of an epoch in which the protocol does not require _block propsoers_ to provide an _activity proof_. During the _delta_ period the _activity proof_ is empty.

> The $\Delta$ allows for two temporal factors, epoch periods and the network's semi-synchronous nature. Firstly, it allows for a fair start of an epoch and prevents the _block proposer_ looking for inactivity in the previous epoch where it would be unaware of the committee as the committee changes end of epoch. Secondly, it allows for the p2p networks _GST + Delta_ latency assumption for timely consensus gossiping.

Reviewer: This section needs a bit of refactoring. The delta is number of block the validators wait for generating an activity proof (e.g. if delta = 5, then at block 100 the validators will generate the activity proof for block 95). The consequence of that is that the last delta block of an epoch are not accountable, because the proof would theoretically need to be generated at the first delta block of the next epoch.

However this is not possible because the epoch end causes committee re-election.

Author: Following discussion with @lorenzo-dev1 , edited in commits 8e52388fb1866300309c6619bc53c379f442c16c and ec44b38195b129d446878533afc079a3f05d32c9

> If the _activity proof_ is empty past the $\Delta$ period, then this is an _omission fault_ (_offence_) and the _block proposer_ is subject to penalty. The $\Delta$ period is set as a protocol configuration parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the _activity proof_ is empty past the first $\Delta$ block of the epoch, then this is an _omission fault_ (_offence_) and the _block proposer_ is subject to penalty. The $\Delta$ period is set as a protocol configuration parameter.
```

The delta size is set by default in the OFD [protocol configuration](/concepts/ofd/#omission-accountability-protocol-configuration) at genesis. It can be changed post-genesis by governance [`setDelta()`](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#setdelta-omission-accountability-contract).

#### Lookback window

The _lookback window_ ($L_{P}$) is a rolling window of blocks over which OFD searches to determine activity at a certain block.

A validator is considered _active_ for block $h-\Delta$ if its _precommit_ signature was included in at least 1 $ActivityProof$ in the range
($h - \Delta - L_{P},h-\Delta$].

> The _lookback window_ is extended by 1 for each empty $ActivityProof$ it includes. I.e. if there are 2 empty $ActivityProof$ in the _lookback window_, $L_{P}' = L_{P} + 2$, with $L_{P}$ being the default value).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _lookback window_ is extended by 1 for each empty $ActivityProof$ it includes. I.e. if there are 2 empty $ActivityProof$ in the _lookback window_, $L_{P}' = L_{P} + 2$, with $L_{P}$ being the default value.
```

The _lookback window_ default value is set in the OFD [protocol configuration](/concepts/ofd/#omission-accountability-protocol-configuration) at genesis. It can be changed post-genesis by governance [`setLookbackWindow()`](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#setlookbackwindow-omission-accountability-contract).

#### Inactivity score

> The average offline percentage of a committee member for an epoch is computed as an _inactivity score_. The offline percentage is measured as the % of blocks in an epoch that the validator has failed to participate in consensus for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The average offline percentage of a committee member for an epoch is computed as an _inactivity score_. The offline percentage is measured as the % of blocks in an epoch that the validator has failed to timely participate in consensus for.
```

> The _inactivity scores_ for the current and past epoch are aggregated to computes an _aggregated inactivity score_. Penalties are applied only if a committee member's _aggregated inactivity score_ breaks the _inactivity threshold_ during an epoch. Penalties are then computed according based on the validator's historical _omission fault_ history and a _probation period_. Historical _omission faults_ are maintained by an _offence_ counter, incrementing by `1` for each _omission fault_. The validator's _aggregated inactivity score_, _offence_ count, and _probation_ are used as weighting factors when computing omission penalties.

Reviewer: The probation period doesn't really affect the slashing rate, but only if the validator will get slashed or not. Also it is worth mentioning that the offence counter gets reset to 0 once the probation period expires without any offence.

Author: Reworded the paragraph for this and to remove redundancy with the following sub-section on probation:

>The _inactivity scores_ for the current and past epoch are combined to compute an _aggregated inactivity score_. Penalties are applied only if a committee member's _aggregated inactivity score_ breaks the _inactivity threshold_ during an epoch. Penalties are then computed based on the validator's historical _omission fault_ history. A validator's history of _omission faults_ is maintained by an _offence_ counter. The counter increments by `1` for each _omission fault_ committed, but is reset to `0` if a validator's _probation period_ expires without the validator committing an _offence_ while on [_probation_](/concepts/ofd/#probation). The validator's _aggregated inactivity score_ and _offence_ count are used as weighting factors when computing omission penalties.

Author: Corrected in commit f0ad427b9e8df012a3adf4bb5c0e7acf0d47bf63.

#### Probation

> To incentivise liveness OFD sets a _probation period_ measured in epochs. The duration of the _probation period_ for a validator is determined by the protocol's _initial probation period_ configured value multiplied by the individual validator's _offence_ count squared. Until the validator has committed a first _offence_ its _probation period_ is nil (`0`) epochs. Once offence count is `>0` the validator is in _probation_ and its _probation period_ will begin to number epochs. As soon as an _offending validator_ completes an entire _probation period_ without offences its _offence_ count is reset to `0`, taking the validator out of _probation_ and so incentivising liveness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To incentivise liveness OFD sets a _probation period_ measured in epochs. The duration of the _probation period_ for a validator is determined by the protocol's _initial probation period_ configured value multiplied by the individual validator's _offence_ count squared. Until the validator has committed a first _offence_ its _probation period_ is nil (`0`) epochs. Once offence count is `>0` the validator is in _probation_ and its _probation period_ will begin to number epochs. As soon as an _offending validator_ completes an entire _probation period_ without offences its _offence_ count is reset to `0`, taking the validator out of _probation_.
```

#### Thresholds

The _threshold_ sets a floor which if broken triggers omission penalties. OFD has multiple thresholds:

- The _inactivity threshold_ sets a floor for the % of blocks in an epoch that a validator must be active for else it will be determined to be an _offending validator_ at the end of the epoch. 
On breaking the _inactivity threshold_ at the end of the epoch the validator is determined to be an offender and subject to penalties.
- The _withholding threshold_ sets a floor which if broken triggers _withholding_ of staking rewards and Newton inflation rewards.

> - The _negligible threshold_ sets a floor which if broken triggers _jailing_.

Reviewer: This is wrong, also we don't have the negligible threshold parameter anymore. I believe you might be referring to what is now called `withholding threshold`?

Author: Correct. Revised after conversation with @ScottRMalley , commit f0ad427b9e8df012a3adf4bb5c0e7acf0d47bf63.

#### Inactivity penalties

The OFD protocol will apply penalties to an _offending validator_ for proven omission faults after a _threshold_ has been crossed. Penalties applied to an _offending validator_ are:

- on breaking the _withholding threshold_: withholding of staking rewards and newton inflation rewards for the epoch proportionally to the validator's _inactivity score_ in the epoch. The lost rewards are transferred to the withheld rewards pool for community funding.

> - on breaking the _negligible threshold_: jailing and withholding of all staking rewards and newton inflation rewards for the epoch. The _offending validator_ is jailed for a number of epochs determined by the protocol's _initial jailing period_ configured value and the number of inactivity _offences_ committed by the validator. The lost rewards are transferred to the withheld rewards pool for community funding.

Reviewer: same here, this is for the inactivity threshold, not the negligible

Author: Corrected in commit f0ad427b9e8df012a3adf4bb5c0e7acf0d47bf63 after discussion with @ScottRMalley

> - on committing an _offence_ when on _probation_: slashing and permanent jailing. The _offending validator_ is slashed according to the protocol's _initial slashing rate_ configured value, validator's offences squared, and the number of other validators committing omission offences in the epoch (_collusion degree_). The validator is permanently jailed.

Reviewer: permanent jailing happens only if slashed 100%, while offence while on probation doesn't imply 100% slash.

Author: Fixed in commit f0ad427b9e8df012a3adf4bb5c0e7acf0d47bf63.

On *temporary* jailing the validator enters a `jailedForInactivity` state and is *impermanently* jailed for a number of blocks, the [jail period](/glossary/#jail-period). The validator's jail release block number is computed based on its proven fault history as described in [Jail period calculation](/concepts/ofd/#jail-period-calculation). After expiry of the jail period a validator may get out of jail by [re-activating](/concepts/validator/#validator-re-activation) to revert to an `active` state and resume [eligibility for consensus committee selection](/concepts/validator/#eligibility-for-selection-to-consensus-committee).

::: {.callout-note title="Note" collapse="false"}
The _offending validator_ will remain in a `jailedForInactivity` state even after jail period expiry.  The validator operator _must_ manually [re-activate](/concepts/validator/#validator-re-activation) by calling the [`activateValidator()`](/reference/api/aut/#activatevalidator) function to get out of jail.

The protocol **does not** automatically revert validator state from `jailedForInactivity` to `active` at the jail release block number. 
:::

> On *permanent* jailing the validator enters a `jailboundForInactivity` state and is *permanently* jailed. It becomes [jailbound](/glossary/#jailbound) and cannot get out of jail. Permanent jailing is only applied in the case where a validator is found guilty by the [omission fault detection protocol](/concepts/ofd/) of an omission fault while on _probation_ as a member of the consensus committee.

Reviewer: same here

Author: Corrected in commit f0ad427b9e8df012a3adf4bb5c0e7acf0d47bf63.

::: {.callout-note title="How AFD and OFD differ in distributing staking rewards lost through validator jailing" collapse="false"}

Validator jailing has a penalty of _losing all staking rewards earned by the validator for its share of voting power in the epoch_. I.e. there is no validator commission paid on the rewards earned and no distribution of staking rewards for stake delegated to that validator for that epoch.

Both AFD and OFD have the concept of jailing, the distinction being OFD jails for _inactivity_ and AFD jails for _accountability faults_.

If a validator has been jailed by AFD then all staking rewards earned by the validator in the epoch are _forfeited_ and distributed to the _reporting validator_ as described in [Accountability fault Detection (AFD), Slashing penalties](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-penalties).

If a validator has been jailed by OFD then all staking rewards earned by the validator in the epoch are _wittheld_ and distributed to the _withheld rewards pool account_ for community funding as described in [Slashing penalties](/concepts/ofd/#slashing-penalties) on this page.

:::

## Protocol configuration

> Slashing penalties for an _offending validator_ are computed by the protocol based on the offending validator's _aggregated inactivity score_, its _offence_ history, if it is on _probation_, and the total number of offences committed in the current and preceding epoch by other committee members, i.e. a _collusion degree_. For the omission fault parameters see [slashing protocol configuration](/concepts/ofd/#slashing-protocol-configuration) beneath.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slashing penalties for an _offending validator_ are computed by the protocol based on the offending validator's _aggregated inactivity score_, its _offence_ history, if it is on _probation_, and the total number of offences committed in the current epoch by other committee members, i.e. a _collusion degree_. For the omission fault parameters see [slashing protocol configuration](/concepts/ofd/#slashing-protocol-configuration) beneath.
```

Applied slashing penalties cover withholding of ATN staking rewards and NTN Newton inflation rewards proportional to the % of offline blocks in the epoch, probation, jailing, and slashing a percentage of stake. Slashing and probation scale up quadratically by the number of repeated offences.

Penalties are applied for proven omission faults at epoch end. 

> Slashing is applied as part of the state finalization function. As the last block of an epoch is finalized, OFD will apply slashing for proven _omission faults_ to withhold ATN staking rewards and NTN inflation rewards, slash validator stake per Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model, and applying validator jailing if detected committing an _omission fault_ while on _probation_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slashing is applied as part of the state finalization function. As the last block of an epoch is finalized, OFD will apply penalties for proven _omission faults_ to withhold ATN staking rewards and NTN inflation rewards, slash validator stake per Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model, and applying validator jailing if detected committing an _omission fault_ while on _probation_.
```

### Protocol parameters

OFD protocol parameters are set by default to:

| Protocol parameter | Description | Value |
|:--:|:--|:--:|
| _inactivity threshold_ | the threshold to determine if a committee member is an _offending validator_ at the end of the epoch | `1000` (10%) |
| _lookback window_ | the number of blocks over which the protocol will look for inactivity | `40` (40 blocks) |

> | _past performance weight_ | a factor that determines how much weight is given to past performance of the validator in the preceding epoch. The factor is subtracted from the validator's performance in the current epoch when computing the aggregated inactivity score | `1000` (10%) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| _past performance weight_ | a factor that determines how much weight is given to past performance of the validator in the preceding epoch| `1000` (10%) |
```

No need for this implementation detail

| _initial jailing period_ | the initial number of epoch(s) that an _offending validator_ will be jailed for | `10_000` (10000 blocks) |
| _initial probation period_ | the initial number of epoch(s) that an _offending validator_ will be set under probation for | `24` (24 epochs) |

> | _initial slashing rate_ | the division precision used as the denominator when computing the slashing amount of a penalty | `25` (0.25%) |

Reviewer: this definition needs to be corrected

Author: Corrected as done for comment https://github.com/autonity/docs.autonity.org/pull/259#discussion_r2063589147.  Commit 200393b55d70094556206c67eb6661a40614de87

| _delta_ | the number of blocks to wait before generating an activity proof. E.g. activity proof of block `x` is for block `x - delta` | `5` (5 blocks) |
| _slashing rate scale factor_ | the division precision used as the denominator when computing the slashing amount of a penalty | `10_000` (0.01%) |

::: {.callout-important title="A note on the initial value settings" collapse="false"}

Initial values for jailing, probation, and slashing are used to determine the scaling up a validator's _jailing period_, _probation period_, and _slashing percentage_ by the number of repeated offences quadratically.

> Slashing will also scale up quadratically with the collusion degree, since it helps to safeguard the liveness of the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slashing will also scale up linearly with the collusion degree, since it helps to safeguard the liveness of the network.
```

| Economic loss | Receiving account | Distribution | Description |
|:-- |:--|:--|:--|
| Loss of current epoch staking rewards | [`withheldRewardsPool`](/reference/genesis/#config.autonity-object) account  | epoch end | The _offending validator_ loses a % of staking rewards proportional to its _inactivity score_ in the epoch the omission penalty is applied. The forfeited rewards are transferred to the _withheld rewards pool_ account for community funding. Amount is determined by the [Rewards withholding calculation](/concepts/ofd/#rewards-withholding-calculation). |
| Loss of current epoch Newton inflation rewards | [`withheldRewardsPool`](/reference/genesis/#config.autonity-object) account  | epoch end | The _offending validator_ loses a % of Newton inflation rewards proportional to its _inactivity score_ in the epoch the omission penalty is applied. The forfeited rewards are transferred to the _withheld rewards pool_ account for community funding. Amount is determined by the [Rewards withholding calculation](/concepts/ofd/#rewards-withholding-calculation). |

> | Loss of current epoch block proposer rewards | n/a  | n/a | The _block proposer_ does not earn proposer rewards for a block outside the [_delta_ $\Delta$](/concepts/ofd/#delta-delta) if it includes an [_activity proof_](/concepts/ofd/#activity-proof) that does not contain signatures for $> \frac{2}{3}$ of block quorum voting power. The forfeited proposer rewards are simply not deducted from the total ATN and NTN rewards earned for the epoch and so remain in the ATN and NTN rewards distributed to the committee stake delegators at epoch end. See [Proposer reward calculation](/concepts/ofd/#proposer-reward-calculation) formula.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Loss of current epoch block proposer rewards | n/a  | n/a | The _block proposer_ does not earn proposer rewards for a block if it includes an [_activity proof_](/concepts/ofd/#activity-proof) that does not contain signatures for $> \frac{2}{3}$ of block quorum voting power. See [Proposer reward calculation](/concepts/ofd/#proposer-reward-calculation) formula.|
```

implementation detail + removing imprecise sentence. If a validator doesn't put in any effort, his part of rewards will simply be distributed among the other proposers. I.e. that sum doesn't get re-injected in the epoch rewards.

Reviewer: In the edge case that the total effort of the entire network is 0 (basically impossible) the entire sum of proposer rewards will be redistributed at the next epoch (always following the proposer rewards logic). However it is a so rare edge case I don't think it is even worth it to mention it in the docs. It will just confuse people .

### Rewards

Economic rewards are provided to _block proposers_ and through the withholding of staking and Newton inflation rewards to the _community_.

Proposer rewards are distributed as incentive for _block proposers_ that have included [activity proofs](/concepts/ofd/#activity-proof) in blocks where the number of signatures is greater than the $\frac{2}{3}$ quorum of voting power required for consensus. See [Proposer reward calculation](/concepts/ofd/#proposer-reward-calculation) for the formula.

Withheld rewards distributed to the _community_ are conditional on the extent to which the _offending validator_ was inactive during the epoch, if it was jailed, and the amount of stake delegated to _offending validator_.

::: {.callout-note title="Rewards are ATN and NTN" collapse="false"}

Both _proposer rewards_ and _withheld rewards_ comprise ATN and NTN that the _offending validator_ has earned in the epoch:

- ATN staking rewards from transaction fees, withheld for inactivity
- NTN rewards from the Newton inflation mechanism, withheld for jailed validators.

> :::

Reviewer: I am not sure what this callout tries to communicate, since it mixes up proposer rewards and withheld rewards

Author: Re-reading it, completely agree.

Deleted in commit f1aab07ed219300f67fcbadd84053bde435f6ebc

| Economic gain | Receiving account | Distribution | Description |
|:-- |:--|:--|:--|
| proposer rewards | [`treasury`](/concepts/validator/#treasury-account) account | epoch end | The block proposer rewards earned by the validator for the epoch. Amount determined by the [Proposer reward calculation](/concepts/ofd/#proposer-reward-calculation) formula. |

> | withheld rewards | [`withheldRewardsPool`](/reference/genesis/#config.autonity-object) account | epoch end | ATN staking rewards and NTN inflation rewards earned by the _offending validator_ for the epoch are forfeited and are sent to the withheld pools account for community funding. Amount determined by the validator's share of the committee's [voting power](/glossary/#voting-power), the number of transactions processed during the epoch, the emission of the [Newton inflation mechanism](/concepts/protocol-assets/newton/#total-supply-and-newton-inflation). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| withheld rewards | [`withheldRewardsPool`](/reference/genesis/#config.autonity-object) account | epoch end | ATN staking rewards and NTN inflation rewards earned by the _offending validator_ for the epoch are forfeited and are sent to the withheld pool account for community funding. Amount determined by the validator's share of the committee's [voting power](/glossary/#voting-power), the number of transactions processed during the epoch, the emission of the [Newton inflation mechanism](/concepts/protocol-assets/newton/#total-supply-and-newton-inflation). |
```
